Hello, and welcome back.
We just spent a couple of videos talking
about edges, and how important it is to
compute edges in order to obtain image
segmentation.
In this video, we are going to present
Otsu's method.
Otsu, basically looks at the histogram of
the image.
It looks at the pixel values and looks at
the property that in order to maintain
segments, we need kind of uniform pixel
values.
So it's not looking at edges, it's
looking at the regions inside the
segments that we want to segment out the
objects that we want to object out.
Let's look at the basic underlying idea
behind Otsu what motivates this
algorithm, and then we're going to
explain how it works.
If we look at this image of a finger
print.
Let, we plot the histogram, and the
histogram is what's called bimodal.
A lot of pixels values are here, which is
basically a lot of the fingerprint.
And a lot of pixel values are here, which
is basically the background.
Very clear, two modes in the histogram.
So this is a multi-modal histogram.
And the basic idea is that if we
threshold here, we can obtain a very
simple segmentation, which has separated
the fingerprint marks from the background
by a simple threshold because we have
these bimodal distribution.
Otsu, it's going to help us to find
basically the threshold in an automatic
fashion.
Now of course, not all the time images
are as nicely distributed as this one.
Let us look at this very simple example.
Here we have a binary image, so we have
still bimodal distribution, but just to
the other functions.
If we add a little bit of noise, then
we're going to still get, so this is
Gaussian noise, we're still going to get
two modalities.
And Otsu it's going to be able to,
without any problem, Otsu's method is
going to be able to segment this out with
no problem, it's going to find the
threshold.
Now if we add much more noise, the
variance is about five times going from
here to here.
Now the histogram, is much more
distributed.
We don't have this multi-modality and
Otsu is not going to.
Otsu's method is going to, not going to
be able to find a nice threshold.
I haven't explained to you the method
yet.
But if we apply the method to this image,
because of this distribution,
this is what we are going to get.
We are not going to be able to segment it
out.
But of course, at this time, fifth week
in image processing.
We're not really scared of noise.
We see a noisy image, we can denoise it.
If we denoise,
we might be able to get back in this
case, we get back to this bimodal
distribution and then Otsu's Automatic
threshold algorithm is going to be able
to segment it back.
So it's a very powerful technique as
we're going to see.
This is a simple image to illustrate the
idea.
So what is the method trying to do?
The method is trying to find a threshold
such that the in class variability is
very small, so we want to find a
threshold here such that the variance on
each one of the classes is as small as
possible so the class is as compact as
possible.
And the methods start from the histogram,
there is no spacial relationship here.
So we lost the special relationship.
So regions that have similar pixel values
but are in completely different positions
in the image.
Will kind of be, merged in the histogram
and then Otsu's algorithm is going to
treat them as the same.
So, we're going to see later on how
algorithms that take into account this
special relationship between the pixels,
but this doesn't.
The basic idea is very simple.
We need to minimize the weighted within
class variants.
We have seen two classes and we need to
minimize the weighted within class
variants.
So what's that class variants is defined
here.
T is going to be the threshold.
That's the threshold that we are looking
for it's going to be if we have a regular
image somebody between zero and 255, and
this is the value we're trying to
minimize for and let me define each one
of these variables here, although they
are pretty clear.
So this is basically the probability of
each one of the classes.
P is what we get from the histogram.
We start from the histogram.
We have a probability for every pixel
value.
So we compute the histogram and we
normalize it, so it's a probability, as
we have taught, a few weeks before.
And then we have, we go from one to T.
That's where we put the threshold,
or from T plus one to the end of the, the
largest pixel value to 55.
And then we get the probability for class
one,
the probability for class two.
Then, we simply get the means for class
one and for class two, and then we also
get the variance for class one, and the
variance for class two.
And in such a way, we obtain the weighted
within class variance, which is here and
that's what we wang to minimize.
Once again, this measurement, basically,
it has the compactness of the classes.
If we put the threshold in the wrong
place, there's going to be large variance
for one of the classes, and we don't want
that.
So, that's what we need to optimize.
That's what Otsu's algorithm does.
Now.
How to implement this?
One way is extremely trivial.
You just try.
You go for T equals zero you compute
this,
not hard.
And then you compute this value.
You do the same thing for one, two,
everything up to 255.
You remember which one was the lowest.
You keep that threshold, and you're done.
That by itself would already be very
fast.
Very efficient, very fast.
If you do some algebra, you can actually
find out very simple algebra.
Just plug in the formulas from the
previous slide here, and you can find out
that this, which is the total, variance
of the image, is basically the sum, of
the within class, and the between class
variance.
Now, this is of course constant, it
doesn't depend on the threshold, the
image is just one image and the variance
of that image is constant.
So we want to minimize this, this is
constant, this is equivalent to
maximizing this.
Now the probabilities and the means
basically are very, very easy to update
as we move the threshold in a very simple
recursive formula.
Which is you know, add one more, add one
more when we are moving the threshold.
So basically, this can be computed very
efficiently in a recursive fashion as we
go from let's say, T plus ten, to eleven,
twelve, thirteen.
We basically keep adding here and then,
very fast, we compute.
We once again run from zero to 255 on the
Ts.
The difference is that, computing this
cannot be done explicitly in a recursive
fashion, but this can be done explicitly
in a recursive fashion where the T1 plus
one depends on the T in a very simple
formula.
It just, you know means and probabilities
very simple.
You keep adding and you get to the
result.
So very simple either if you just do
direct computation or if you use the
recursive computation, you run through
all the possible values of T.
You pick the one that either minimizes
these, or maximizes these, and you're
done.
So,
before I show you some examples inside
MATLAB, I want to tell you something.
If you have a non-uniform background like
in this image, then Otsu is not going to
help. Otsu's algorithm is not going to
help because you may have a binary
distribution.
Like we draw here,
but then because of the bias of the
background, this will not be basic binary
bimodal type of distribution.
So I just explained you how to do Otsu's
algorithm in the whole image.
You can also do it in blocks of the
image,
to try to get rid of the problem with
basically a non-uniform background.
And then you're going to get a different
threshold for every single one of the
region.
Or if you want, you can actually do
what's called a moving window.
You can just do it here.
Sorry, let me just get the pen.
You do it here,
then you do it in a narrow window like
this, and then you basically do it in a
narrow window like this.
And then you can, for example if you
want, you can average the thresholds that
you get in the overlapping windows.
Or you can create a function of the
thresholds.
So once again, as in many of the
algorithms that I have explained, there's
the underlying concept, which is to
separate the images to minimize that
within variance that we just explained.
Now that concept you can implement in
many different fashions in the whole
image in blocks,
overlapping blocks, non-overlapping
blocks.
You know, there, there's a lot of art and
basically depending on the application,
what to apply.
Once you do it, for example, as here.
If you do it globally,
let me just erase the annotation so it's
easier.
If you do Otsu in the whole image, this
is what you're going to get,
this is very dark.
So you got confused with the letters in
the distribution and in the optimization
and then it basically the threshold put
it together with the letters and the
writing has been it's basically gone.
Now if you do it with a moving window,
you get this beautiful resolve back.
Once again extremely, extremely simple
all of what we are doing is to segment
out the letters here we're computing
thresholds we move a window we just move
regions.
We move it and we are completing
thresholds with the formulas that I just
explained to you.
Now let's see an application of this
running inside MATLAB.
In order to illustrate Otsu's method in
side MATLAB the first thing we have to do
always is to load the image.
So here we have, we are loading the
image, this is the separation.
The next operation is what actually does
the complication of the optimal
threshold.
The Otsu's algorithm that we just
described.
That's this operation in MATLAB,
that it gives us the level, it gives us
the value of the optimal threshold.
And then we are basically going to
threshold the image following that value.
So, let's see the results of all these
operations.
We have link here, and let me just move
the window so we can observe them better.
This is the image,
this is the histogram.
Now you're an expert in Otsu's method.
So the moment you see this histogram, you
say wow, that's great.
I can do a pretty decent job if I just
compute that optimal threshold that
should be around here.
And that's a result of threshold in the
image, with that optimal threshold.
Looks pretty nice,
remember no special information.
So for example, you might be able to see
a few pixels here that were included as
part of the background.
Of course,
without any type of smoothing, you will
get read and get a very, very nice white
object inside here.
Here things are a bit different and
that's because as you see this part of
the coin is relatively dark, almost as
dark as the background, or basically as
dark as the background.
And that's why it was included as part of
the background.
Situation might have been different if we
do Otsu's method in a local window or
some other variant of Otsu's method.
But the idea is very clear for most of
the image, wish a, which, with a simple
threshold we get a very nice
segmentation.
And that threshold we don't need to
specify by hand,
Otsu's method automatically computes for
us.
So let's go back to the slides and we'll
finish this video,
thank you.
In this video we have seen another
classical standard, very simple and very
powerful image segmentation algorithm.
Unfortunately, not all the images are
easy enough for Otsu or segment or for
the half transform to segment and we're
going to need more advanced techniques to
be able to handle them.
And that's going to be the topic of the
future videos in this week.
I'm looking forward to seeing you then
and to having a lot of fun and I hope
that you are having to.
Thank you.